feat: Versioned timeouts CIP draft (#216)
celestiaorg/CIPs: cips/cip-6-second-blocks.md

| cip | TBD |
| - | - |
| title | Reduce block time to six seconds |
| description | Proposal to reduce block time on celestia-app to 6 seconds, from 12. |
| author | Josh Stein ([@jcstein](https://github.com/jcstein)) |
| discussions-to | <https://forum.celestia.org/t/cip-decrease-block-time-to-6-seconds/1836> |
| status | Draft |
| type | Standards Track |
| category | Core |
| created | 2024-10-09 |

## Abstract

> This CIP proposes to reduce the block time on celestia-app to 6 seconds, from 12. This will increase the throughput by double and and reduce the time it takes for transactions to be finalized by half.

Reviewer: [very optional] grammar stuff

```suggestion
This CIP proposes to reduce the block time on celestia-app to 6 seconds, from 12. This will double the throughput and reduce the time it takes for transactions to be finalized in half.
```

## Motivation

The motivation for this CIP stems from a discussion in Core Devs Call 17, where it was proposed to reduce the block time to 6 seconds from 12 seconds.

## Specification

> 1. The block time in celestia-app MUST be reduced from 12 seconds to 6 seconds.

Reviewer: [nit] celestia-app (and celestia-core) can't guarantee block times. Currently it targets ~12 second blocks but makes blocks every ~11.77 seconds on average. Since we can't guarantee block times, perhaps this can be rephrased to say something like:

1. The block time in celestia-app should be reduced from 12 seconds to 6 seconds. Concretely this implies decreasing TimeoutCommit to _ seconds and TimeoutPropose to _ seconds.

Author: got it, thank you! https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/79595cdac2bba302d09466485b65339431643763/pkg/appconsts/v3/app_consts.go#L11-L12 is the right place to reference here, right?

Reviewer: Yea seems right

2. All implementations of celestia-app SHALL adjust their block production mechanisms to conform to this new 6-second block time.

> 3. The change in block time MUST be implemented at a specific block height, which SHALL be determined and agreed upon by the Celestia community.

Reviewer: [no change needed]

> which SHALL be determined and agreed upon by the Celestia community.

specifically via on-chain version signaling by validators

4. Celestia consensus nodes SHOULD update their software to accommodate this change prior to the agreed-upon block height.

> 5. The reduction in block time SHALL NOT affect the overall security or integrity of the Celestia network.

Reviewer: This is a desired property but I don't think it belongs in the spec

```suggestion
```

> 6. Validators MUST ensure that their systems are capable of producing and validating blocks at this increased rate.

Reviewer: I don't think we have guidance on how validators should ensure their systems are capable of doing this. IMO if they upgrade to the correct version, then they should be fine. 

```suggestion
```

7. Client applications interacting with the Celestia network SHOULD be updated to account for the faster block time, particularly in areas related to transaction confirmation and block finality.

8. The implementation of this change SHOULD include appropriate testing and monitoring to ensure network stability during and after the transition.

9. Documentation and APIs related to block time and block production MUST be updated to reflect this change.

> 10. The network SHOULD provide a grace period for node operators and other participants to adapt to the new block time, but all participants MUST be compliant by the agreed-upon implementation block height.

Reviewer: This item is more relevant for https://github.com/celestiaorg/CIPs/blob/main/cips/cip-10.md and the upgrade mechanism rather than this CIP. Alternatively it could even be placed in the meta-CIP for ginger.

```suggestion
```

Author: I'll revisit this later today. to clarify, you mean including CIP-10 as part of the Meta CIP for Ginger?

Reviewer: To clarify I mean that CIP-10 is the right place for discussion on the "grace period for node operators". Since that CIP already merged and got included, we can just drop this line from this CIP.

I don't think CIP-10 needs to be part of the meta CIP.

FWIW there is actually a grace period of one week after 5/6 validators have voted for a version but that was added after CIP-10 was created.

Author: made an issue to track this https://github.com/celestiaorg/CIPs/issues/218

## Rationale

The rationale for this change is to increase the throughput of the Celestia network by doubling the number of blocks produced per unit of time. This will reduce the time it takes for transactions to be finalized and improve the overall user experience on the network.

## Backwards Compatibility

This is a breaking network upgrade and will require all participants to update their software to accommodate the new block time. The change in block time will not be backward compatible with the existing network, and all participants MUST be compliant by the agreed-upon implementation block height.

## Test Cases

This will be tested on Arabica devnet and Mocha testnet before going live on Celestia Mainnet Beta.

## Security Considerations

> The security considerations for this change are minimal, as the reduction in block time does not introduce any new security risks to the network. However, participants should be aware of the faster block time and ensure that their systems are capable of handling the increased throughput.

Reviewer: [nit] we could consider https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/issues/3959 here b/c those other constants do impact security.

Author: Good nit. I'll propose we update this once we hear back from IBC team: https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/issues/3959#issuecomment-2405769487

My understanding is:
Mempool TTL duration:
- Proposal: Increase TTL num blocks from 5 to 12 in v3 to match TTL duration

Evidence MaxAgeNumBlocks:
- No change needed as evidence is only considered expired after both 21 days and 120960 blocks
Long-term proposal: Make evidence params non-governance modifiable and hard-code them to ~21 days

IBC MaxExpectedTimePerBlock:
- TBD

Reviewer: Yep spot on!

Author: awesome, and now this summary should be accurate based on the update to https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/issues/3959

**Mempool TTL duration**:
- Implement: Increase TTL num blocks from 5 to 12 in v3 to match TTL duration

**Evidence MaxAgeNumBlocks**:
- No immediate action needed
- Long-term consideration: Make evidence params non-governance modifiable and hard-code them to ~21 days

**IBC MaxExpectedTimePerBlock**:
- No action required at this time
- Keep monitoring in case of future changes in IBC connection usage

> | cip | TBD |

Author: ```suggestion
| cip | 26 |
```

| - | - |
| title | Reduce block time to six seconds |
| description | Proposal to reduce block time on celestia-app to 6 seconds, from 12. |
| author | Josh Stein ([@jcstein](https://github.com/jcstein)), Rootul Patel ([@rootulp](https://github.com/rootulp))|
| discussions-to | <https://forum.celestia.org/t/cip-decrease-block-time-to-6-seconds/1836> |
| status | Draft |
| type | Standards Track |
| category | Core |
| created | 2024-10-09 |

## Abstract

> This CIP proposes to reduce the block time on celestia-app to 6 seconds, from 12. This CIP also proposes to increase the `ttl-num-blocks` parameter in the mempool configuration from 5 to 12 to maintain consistency with the new block time. This will double the throughput and reduce the time it takes for transactions to be finalized in half.

Author: ```suggestion
This CIP proposes to reduce the block time on celestia-app to 6 seconds, from 12. This will double the throughput and reduce the time it takes for transactions to be finalized in half. This CIP also proposes to increase the `ttl-num-blocks` parameter in the mempool configuration from 5 to 12 to maintain consistency with the new block time.
```

## Motivation

The motivation for this CIP stems from a discussion in Core Devs Call 17, where it was proposed to reduce the block time to 6 seconds from 12 seconds.

> ## Specification

Reviewer: I think this specification section should include a short blurb on why `TimeoutCommit` and `TimeoutPropose` were moved from local config parameters into versioned parameters controlled by the state machine. cc: @staheri14

Author: using this for now "The `TimeoutCommit` and `TimeoutPropose` parameters were moved from local config parameters into versioned parameters controlled by the state machine to ensure consistency and correctness across different protocol versions. This change allows the system to adapt dynamically to version-specific requirements, improving overall stability and interoperability during upgrades."

Author: https://github.com/celestiaorg/CIPs/pull/216/commits/837357a1aa8e705fb11aff72c3b6ace03b225382

> 1. The block time in celestia-app SHOULD be reduced from 12 seconds to 6 seconds. Concretely, this implies decreasing `TimeoutCommit` to 1 seconds and `TimeoutPropose` to 3 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The block time in celestia-app SHOULD be reduced from 12 seconds to 6 seconds. Concretely, this implies decreasing `TimeoutCommit` to 4.2 seconds and `TimeoutPropose` to 3.5 seconds.
```

Ref: https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/pull/3882/files#diff-bde1beb207ad61f9bfa245c7600ae51548819aa36cc12217144561fd11c9faa0R12-R13

Author: I was editing locally and pushed before I saw this and comment below. So, thank you for the suggestions and apologies they can't be merged with co-authorship!

Author: https://github.com/celestiaorg/CIPs/pull/216/commits/627866eaa585b4ecfd76ddcbfae268f07abb2c7c

1. All implementations of celestia-app SHALL adjust their block production mechanisms to conform to this new 6-second block time.

1. The change in block time MUST be implemented at a specific block height, which SHALL be determined and agreed upon by the Celestia community via on-chain signaling by validators.

1. Celestia consensus nodes SHOULD update their software to accommodate this change prior to the agreed-upon block height.

1. Client applications interacting with the Celestia network SHOULD be updated to account for the faster block time, particularly in areas related to transaction confirmation and block finality.

1. The implementation of this change SHOULD include appropriate testing and monitoring to ensure network stability during and after the transition.

1. Documentation and APIs related to block time and block production MUST be updated to reflect this change.

> 1. The `ttl-num-blocks` parameter in the mempool configuration SHALL be increased from 5 to 12. This change is necessary to maintain consistency with the new block time and ensure that transactions remain in the mempool for a similar duration as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The default `ttl-num-blocks` parameter in the mempool configuration SHALL be increased from 5 to 12. This change is necessary to maintain consistency with the new block time and ensure that transactions remain in the mempool for a similar duration as before.
```

Since the parameter is locally configured by validators, we only changed the default value. Validator's are free to modify it in their local config.

Author: https://github.com/celestiaorg/CIPs/pull/216/commits/627866eaa585b4ecfd76ddcbfae268f07abb2c7c

    1. Current default: `ttl-num-blocks = 5`
    1. New default: `ttl-num-blocks = 12`

> 1. This change SHALL be implemented alongside the block time reduction to ensure consistent behavior of the mempool across the network upgrade.

Reviewer: [no change needed] just a note for other reviewers that we increased the default from `5` => `12` but that change doesn't occur alongside the block time reduction. The change occurs when people upgrade to v3.0.0 and regenerate their config files.

The block time reduction will happen one week later when the v2 -> v3 activation height occurs.
